Martinh/multigov deployment (#269)
wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs: build/contract-integrations/multigov/deploy-to-solana.md

```bash
./scripts/build_verifiable_staking_program.sh
```

Once the build is complete, the compiled artifacts will be available in the `target` folder.

## Set Up the Deployer Account

For a successful deployment, you need a funded deployer account on Solana. This account will store the program and execute deployment transactions. 

In this section, you will create a new keypair, check the account balance, and ensure it has enough SOL tokens to cover deployment costs. If needed, you can fund the account using different methods before deploying. 

### Generate a New Keypair  

To create a new keypair and save it to a file, run the following command:  

```bash
solana-keygen new --outfile ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
```

### Check the Deployer Account Address  

To retrieve the public address of the newly created keypair, run the following command:  

```bash
solana address -k ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
```

### Check the Deployer Account Balance  

To verify the current balance of the deployer account, run the following command:  

```bash
solana balance -k ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
```

> !!! important 

Reviewer: This should be note or warning, we don't support important (and it defaults to note)

    - 0.00542 SOL for transaction fees

### Fund the Deployer Account  

If the account does not have enough SOL, use one of the following methods to add funds.  

 - **Transfer SOL from another account** - if you already have SOL in another account, transfer it using a wallet (Phantom, Solflare, etc.) or in the terminal 

    ```bash
    solana transfer <deployer_account_address> <amount> --from /path/to/funder.json
    ```

 - **Request an airdrop (devnet only)** - if deploying to devnet, you can request free SOL

    ```bash
    solana airdrop 2 -k ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
    ```

 - **Use a Solana faucet (devnet only)** - you can use online faucets to receive 10 free SOL

    - [Solana Faucet](https://faucet.solana.com/){target=\_blank}

## Deploy the MultiGov Staking Program

With the deployer account set up and funded, you can deploy the MultiGov Staking Program to the Solana blockchain. This step involves deploying the program, verifying the deployment, and ensuring the necessary storage and metadata are correctly configured. Once the IDL is initialized, the program will be ready for further setup and interaction.

### Deploy the Program  

> Deploy the MultiGov Staking Program using **Anchor**:  

Reviewer: It's not necessary to put Anchor in bold

---
title: MultiGov Deployment to Solana
description: Learn how to deploy the MultiGov Staking Program on Solana, including setup, funding, deployment, and configuration steps. 
---

# Deploy MultiGov on Solana  

> This guide provides instructions on how to set up and deploy the **MultiGov Staking Program** on Solana. Before proceeding with the deployment, ensure that MultiGov aligns with your project’s governance needs by reviewing the system [architecture](/docs/learn/governance/architecture/){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide provides instructions on how to set up and deploy the **MultiGov Staking Program** on Solana. Before proceeding with the deployment, ensure that MultiGov aligns with your project's governance needs by reviewing the system [architecture](/docs/learn/governance/architecture/){target=\_blank}.
```

Once your project setup is complete, follow this guide to configure, compile, and deploy the necessary Solana programs and supporting accounts. This deployment enables decentralized governance participation on Solana as a spoke chain within the MultiGov system.  

## Prerequisites 

To deploy MultiGov on Solana, ensure you have the following installed:  

 - Install [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads){target=\_blank}  
 - Install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/){target=\_blank} **`v20.10.0`**

>  - Install [Solana CLI](https://docs.solana.com/cli/install-solana-cli){target=\_blank} **`v1.18.20`**

Reviewer 3: This link seems broken. Perhaps the link you need to add is https://docs.anza.xyz/cli/install#use-the-solana-install-tool?

Author: Good catch!

 - Install [Anchor](https://www.anchor-lang.com/docs/installation){target=\_blank} **`v0.30.1`**
 - Install [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install){target=\_blank} **`v1.80.1`**
 - Install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started/){target=\_blank}
 - Clone the repository:  
    ```bash

>     git clone https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/multigov.git  

Reviewer 4: this repo is still private - not sure if we should ship this already since it's not available

Author: It's public now

    cd multigov/solana/
    ```

## Build the Project

To create a verifiable build of the MultiGov Staking Program, run the following command:    

```bash
./scripts/build_verifiable_staking_program.sh
```

Once the build is complete, the compiled artifacts will be available in the `target` folder.

## Set Up the Deployer Account

For a successful deployment, you need a funded deployer account on Solana. This account will store the program and execute deployment transactions. 

> In this section, you will create a new keypair, check the account balance, and ensure it has enough SOL to cover deployment costs. If needed, you can fund the account using different methods before deploying. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this section, you will create a new keypair, check the account balance, and ensure it has enough SOL tokens to cover deployment costs. If needed, you can fund the account using different methods before deploying. 
```

### Generate a New Keypair  

> To create a new keypair and save it to a file, run:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create a new keypair and save it to a file, run the following command:  
```

```bash
solana-keygen new --outfile ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
```

### Check the Deployer Account Address  

> To retrieve the public address of the newly created keypair, run:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To retrieve the public address of the newly created keypair, run the following command:  
```

```bash
solana address -k ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
```

### Check the Deployer Account Balance  

> To verify the current balance of the deployer account, run:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To verify the current balance of the deployer account, run the following command:  
```

```bash
solana balance -k ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
```

!!! important 
    When deploying the MultiGov Staking Program, the deployer account must have enough SOL to cover deployment costs and transaction fees.

    - 7.60219224 SOL for deployment costs
    - 0.00542 SOL for transaction fees

### Fund the Deployer Account  

If the account does not have enough SOL, use one of the following methods to add funds.  

> ???- interface "**Transfer SOL from Another Account**"  

Reviewer 2: I'm not crazy about using expandle elements for this. Each entry is a small amount of info so I don't see the point in collapsing them. I would say either a bullet list using the title on the dropdown as the item name:

- **Transfer SOL from Another Account** - If you already have SOL in another account, transfer it using a wallet (Phantom, Solflare, etc.) or in the terminal:
(snippet tucked in under here, go to the next item and do the same, etc.)

OR since the page is kind of long, move this into tabbed content that is expanded with the different funding methods as names on the tabs and the relevant content inside each one. See which you think looks better.

    ```bash
    solana transfer <deployer_account_address> <amount> --from /path/to/funder.json
    ```

???- interface "**Request an Airdrop (Devnet Only)**"  

    If deploying to Devnet, you can request free SOL: 

    ```bash
    solana airdrop 2 -k ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
    ```

???- interface "**Use a Solana Faucet (Devnet Only)**"  

    You can use online faucets to receive 10 free SOL:

    - [Solana Faucet](https://faucet.solana.com/){target=\_blank}

## Deploy the MultiGov Staking Program

With the deployer account set up and funded, you can deploy the MultiGov Staking Program to the Solana blockchain. This step involves deploying the program, verifying the deployment, and ensuring the necessary storage and metadata are correctly configured. Once the IDL is initialized, the program will be ready for further setup and interaction.

### Deploy the Program  

Deploy the MultiGov Staking Program using **Anchor**:  

```bash
anchor deploy --provider.cluster https://api.devnet.solana.com --provider.wallet ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
```

### Verify the Deployment  

> After deployment, check if the program is successfully deployed by running:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After deployment, check if the program is successfully deployed by running the following command:  
```

```bash
solana program show INSERT_PROGRAM_ID
```

### Extend Program Storage  

If the deployed program requires additional storage space for updates or functionality, extend the program storage using the following command:  

```bash
solana program extend INSERT_PROGRAM_ID 800000
```

### Initialize the IDL  

> To associate an IDL file with the deployed program, run:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To associate an IDL file with the deployed program, run the following command:  
```

    ```bash
    npx ts-node app/deploy/06_create_message_executor.ts
    ```

### Set MultiGov Staking Program Key Parameters  

When deploying MultiGov on Solana, several key parameters need to be set. Here are the most important configuration points:  

 - `maxCheckpointsAccountLimit` ++"u64"++ - the maximum number of checkpoints an account can have. For example, `654998` is used in production, while `15` might be used for testing
 - `hubChainId` `u16` - the chain ID of the hub network where proposals are primarily managed. For example, `10002` for Sepolia testnet
 - `hubProposalMetadata` ++"[u8; 20]"++ - an array of bytes representing the address of the Hub Proposal Metadata contract on Ethereum. This is used to identify proposals from the hub 
 - `voteWeightWindowLength` ++"u64"++ - specifies the length of the checkpoint window in seconds in which the minimum voting weight is taken. The window ends at the vote start for a proposal and begins at the vote start minus the vote weight window. The vote weight window helps solve problems such as manipulating votes in a chain 
 - `votingTokenMint` ++"Pubkey"++ - the mint address of the token used for voting  

>  - `governanceAuthority` ++"Pubkey"++ - the account's public key that has the authority to govern the staking system. The `governanceAuthority` should not be the default Pubkey, as this would indicate an uninitialized or incorrectly configured setup

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - `governanceAuthority` ++"Pubkey"++ - the account's public key with the authority to govern the staking system. The `governanceAuthority` should not be the default Pubkey, as this would indicate an uninitialized or incorrectly configured setup
```
